tesla is today the most valuable
automaker in the world by market
capitalization
beating out industry giants like general
motors ford volkswagen group and even
toyota
it has achieved this impressive feat
despite a short operating history
a limited product lineup and even
relatively modest sales figures
compared to these much more established
entities in spite of all of these
indicators though
investors are willing to pay more than
five times as much for the same stake in
tesla
as compared with more traditional
automakers so what is going on here
what do investors see in tesla that a
rational person
might not what is the company's vision
to truly justify being valued this
highly
and could this all be a charismatic ceo
taking a pool of naive investors
for a ride oh and of course before we
start answering these questions
we need to give the standard disclaimer
that we do for all company videos
and that is that nobody on the economics
explain team currently owns any tesla
shares or stock options
so even though we would want to remain
impartial either way
now you know this episode of economics
explained was made possible by our fans
on patreon
if you would like to gain early access
to these videos before they're uploaded
to youtube as well as participate in
exclusive q a sessions which are now
held every saturday at 9 30 eastern
standard time
please consider supporting our channel
at patreon.com
economics explained toyota by most
metrics
is the largest car company in the world
they produce the most cars they make the
most revenue
employ the most people and have a long
tenured history with brand recognition
and a base of loyal customers
that probably spans even further than
they would actually like it to
by comparison tesla sells 130th as many
cars
makes less than 10 of the revenue and oh
yeah hemorrhages money every year it
operates
2019 was actually considered a good year
as far as finances go
because it only lost 862 million dollars
which was an improvement from the year
four where it lost 1 billion
despite this toyota has a market
capitalization
of just under 200 billion dollars
whereas tesla
is more than double this runner-up
sitting at a valuation of over
400 billion so the first thing to know
here is that market capitalizations are
sometimes a bit
misleading this number is calculated by
taking the market price of a stock and
then multiplying it by the total
number of stocks there are currently
just under 1 billion tesla shares in
existence
so if we multiply that by the 430
market price we get ourselves a market
capitalization figure
now the market price is something that
can jump around quite
a lot for any number of reasons that are
completely divorced from the underlying
fundamentals of the company
amateur investor hype stock buybacks
easy access to capital price
manipulating tweets
[Music]
to commit securities fraud all that good
stuff can push the share price up or
down
without actually making the company they
reflect any larger or smaller or more
prosperous
all of these factors are common
criticisms leveled at tesla
but supporters will point to the fact
that building cars
is just one small part of scaling up the
tesla empire
one of the most telling insights into
the difference between tesla
and regular automakers is to look at
their subsidiaries
regular automakers have grown their
influence by buying up
other car brands volkswagen is a great
example of this
volkswagen group is not only responsible
for the people's car but they also own a
part or all of
bentley audi bugatti porsche sia
lamborghini skoda
as well as a collection of commercial
vehicle manufacturers
tesla by contrast is a company that
still owns other companies
but it takes a slightly different
approach to its mergers and acquisitions
instead of buying up competitors it owns
companies within its own supply chain
which allows it to not only be a car
manufacturer but also a component
supplier
a dealership a fuel station energy
generator and
maybe even one day a transport provider
all of its own
now these two different approaches all
hope to achieve the same two things
increase revenue and decrease costs
which results in increased profits
business 101 right but here's how they
do it
a company like volkswagen is investing
in what is known as a horizontal
integration
i.e they are investing in businesses on
the same level of the production
process as their own porsche and
volkswagen are companies that
technically do the same thing
they take raw materials and component
parts and turn them into cars
before selling them off to dealership
networks now just because all of these
car companies
do the same thing doesn't mean that
there aren't huge advantages to teaming
up
companies like volkswagen will build
cars on similar platforms and share them
between
all of their brands the volkswagen
tiguan audi q7 porsche cayenne bentley
bentayga
and even the lamborghini urus all share
the same
basic chassis and components this
achieves the two things that the
business wanted to do
it increases revenue because suddenly
the manufacturer can appeal to all
manner of different
buyers with effectively the same car an
average family gets the base model
volkswagen a wealthier family will buy a
porsche or an audi and for the people
that want a truly ostentatious display
of wealth
there are the bentleys and lamborghinis
that cost six times as much
for effectively the same car this means
that volkswagen will draw revenue from
buyers that don't want to consider
a car from the other end of the spectrum
either because it's far too expensive
or far too povo this technique of shared
platforms
also reduces costs because research and
development as well as manufacturing
overheads are shared between
all of the brands it would be cost
prohibitive for a boutique manufacturer
like bentley
to invest the same amount of money into
developing a new drivetrain
modern cars require huge teams of
engineers designers and lawyers to make
sure that cars comply with
all the various road laws around the
world while also being a good car
and yes yes i know there are boutique
manufacturers out there that do pull
this off without being beholden to some
corporate overlord
but just remember those cars tend to be
extremely expensive
even by bentley and lamborghini
standards and they probably lack the
day-to-day reliability as well
i mean i don't know patreon.com so maybe
one day i can find out
now tesla takes this expansion concept
and turns it on its head
literally it does what is called
vertical integration
where instead of buying up competitors
in the same step of the production
process
it buys up or creates businesses that
cover
other parts of the process tesla's
largest investment has not been into the
cars themselves but rather into
component manufacturing recharging
stations and owning their own dealership
networks
all steps in the process of selling a
car that traditional manufacturers
have left to other companies this
achieves the same two goals
it reduces expenses because you don't
have to include profit markups for all
of the different steps of the process
for example if audi sells a car to a
dealership they are going to sell it at
a wholesale price and then that dealer
will add a markup to the consumer
to make their own profits by owning this
entire process
tesla can cut out those middlemen it
also increases revenue
by offering additional revenue sources
tesla really only makes three cars at
the moment
the model s the model 3 and the model x
we have just seen that the volkswagen
group has a wider selection of products
within just one chassis but in the same
way that volkswagen increased revenue by
offering lots of different types of cars
to lots of different types of people
tesla is offering lots of different
services to the same types of people
if you buy a new porsche then go fill it
up down the road volkswagen is not
seeing
any revenue from the sale of that
gasoline whereas if you buy a new tesla
and go charge it at the company's
supercharger network they will
the same is true for a lot of other
areas as well a byproduct of making
electric
cars with an emphasis on vertical
integration is that tesla has become
really good at making batteries the same
tree hugging tech bro that will
inevitably buy tesla
may very well buy a house with a battery
pack as well
meaning that again they have made money
outside of just being
one of the many moving parts in the auto
industry
so increase revenue and decrease costs
to make more profit
simple formula with two very different
approaches from established automakers
and tesla respectively
the only problem is that as innovative
as tesla's fresh new approach may seem
it hasn't really worked they haven't
made any profit
to the contrary they are losing money
but
maybe that's okay because they haven't
yet achieved the magic solution to all
business woes
economies of scale economies of scale is
a phenomenon in production
where the unit cost of goods trends
downwards as more items are made
this phrase tends to get thrown around
pretty loosely but it's actually a lot
more complex than what most people think
there are three main reasons why this
happens
mitigation of fixed costs efficiencies
and scale and negotiating power
say you were tasked with building just
one car
if push came to shove you could probably
do it but most of you watching would
need to go to school to learn how to put
a car together and you would also need
to buy a whole lot of equipment to
actually manufacture that car this
education and a workshop full of tools
would cost
hundreds of thousands of dollars and
take years of your time to put together
if you were to turn around and sell that
car at a price that was commensurate
with your outlay and effort and that
would be an astronomically expensive
vehicle
easily hundreds of thousands of dollars
but
now let's say you were tasked with
building two cars
well you wouldn't need to go back to
school to learn to build another car and
you could just use the same tools
all over again in this example the tools
and education
are the fixed costs no matter how many
cars are made
you don't need to spend any more on
these and as more and more cars are
produced they reflect
a smaller and smaller fraction of the
total cost involved in making
that car the next big step is scale
hand tools and a garage workshop are
great but
even with the most skilled mechanic in
the world it is going to struggle to put
a card together
from scratch in less than a month a
full-on assembly line on the other hand
well that's a different beast now tasks
can be broken down into very easy very
repetitive actions that might not
require an education at all
what's more is if they do exactly the
same thing day in
and day out you get very very good at it
inherently making production
much more efficient finally if you are
ordering a single piece of every
component that goes into a car
you're going to be paying retail price
for those parts but
if you are ordering hundreds of
thousands of components at a time
or even better yet manufacturing them
in-house you are going to pay
much less for them this lowers the
variable costs of production
so all in all it's looking like a pretty
big win for the economies of scale
it mitigates fixed costs increases
output and reduces
variable costs what's not to love it's
pretty easy to graph out this process
and see that cost competitiveness will
naturally favor those who produce the
most
so sure maybe teslas are a bit too
expensive for most consumers today
as we saw earlier they only make 1 30 at
the number of cars that toyota does
as soon as they expand into making a few
million cars a year
they will have the magic economies of
scale on their side and be super
profitable right
well maybe but probably not as fantastic
as the economies of scale effect
looks it has a dark side you see this
chart here
is not actually complete it is supposed
to look more like
this in typical manufacturing after a
certain point
producing more goods starts to cost more
and more
this is caused by a reverse of the
reasons that we saw all the components
getting cheaper in the first place
those fixed costs for starters either a
would-be manufacturer is going to have
to try and squeeze more and more out of
their existing factory or workshop or
whatever
or they are going to need to open up a
second location to keep making more cars
this is a huge jump in fixed costs that
will need to be shared amongst the costs
associated with each individual car
after that the same thing happens with
breaking down processes into smaller and
smaller tasks
one man building an entire car by hand
is not very efficient
a team working on set steps is efficient
but a huge team of thousands of people
each responsible for
one single screw or weld is just as
inefficient as having one person doing
the whole thing
eventually people will just get in each
other's way
and finally that bulk discount turns
into clearing out entire markets
if you want to buy 10 000 glass windows
you get a bulk discount
if you want to buy 10 million you force
demand up so high that
prices will naturally increase call it a
personal vendetta of mine
but the loose way that people throw
around the idea of economies of scale
being the secret ingredient to every
business
is potentially harmful in choosing good
quality companies to invest in
this should probably be the key takeaway
of the video but nobody will click on a
video called the negative marginal cost
minimization in high output production
so you know haha i tricked you into
learning but
maybe we have been a bit too cynical
here and missed the point of tesla
entirely most institutional investors
agree
that a 400 billion valuation for a car
company
even one with all of its vertical
integration is absolutely
ludicrous especially considering all the
factors we've already explored
but maybe tesla is not a car company at
all
i mean sure it builds cars but not many
of them
and they are really only a means to an
end of efficiently getting people from
place to place
what is much more exciting especially to
investors is the final step of the
company's plan to control
everything related to road based
transport the idea of car ownership
itself tesla is quite famously
developing systems for self-driving cars
right now these systems are little more
than a cool party trick
but they have some much more serious
long-term potentials
it could become their very own transport
network
taxi companies and uber drivers make
money by purchasing vehicles
and using them to transport passengers
which means that there is more money to
be made in moving people about
than simply selling a car as a one-time
transaction
even a range-topping tesla model x sells
for under a hundred thousand dollars in
the us today
which is obviously a lot of money but
that same
car if let loose to act as its very own
uber driver could make
hundreds of thousands of dollars before
eventually being retired
elon musk has already spoken quite
freely about a future
where nobody owns a car which would be
very unusual rhetoric for a
car company ceo had it not been for this
more holistic approach to a transport
solution
now what investors hope this means is
that tesla is more of a
tech company that just so happens to
make cars
rather than a car company that just has
some cool tech
technology has the advantage of being
able to achieve the aforementioned
economies of scale
far more efficiently than other types of
businesses like retail
oil and gas healthcare pharmaceuticals
and yes of course even auto
manufacturing
that's why today seven of the top 10
most valuable companies in the world
are tech companies so the cynical
analysts are right
tesla the car manufacturer is not worth
even a fraction of the 400 billion
evaluation
but a company that proposes to be the
world leader in renewable energy storage
a replacement to gas companies and a
cheaper alternative to uber all in one
well that's a more intriguing
proposition
especially when you consider that well
yeah they do make really cool cars
i definitely want one hi guys i hope you
enjoyed the latest video if you did
please consider liking and subscribing
this video is made possible by our
patrons over on patreon so if you enjoy
this video please consider supporting
the channel
like these awesome people did thanks
guys bye